Do you know what an ontological weapon is?

You could easily be forgiven if not, if you didn't spend altogether too long mired in either philosophical speculation or grinding a particular couple of video games.

But it's pivotal that you learn what it is, so that you may yet recognize when it is used against you. It already is being used against you, and while it shares the primary trait with other weapons (that it unmakes), it is an impossibly subtle weapon, because what it unmakes is reality. 

And changes to reality are so subtle and imperceptible, that you are very likely to fail to notice that reality has changed; 

and, more dangerously, how you have changed to accommodate the changing reality.

*

So what is an ontological weapon?
It goes like this -

There may come a point, on some future day where we have total domain over matter and our perceived reality. By some distant future technology, we could have the means to reshape reality as we saw fit. 

But who decides which reality takes precedence? If people's ideals, opinions, beliefs, conflict, then the imagined realities that they seek to make real will come into conflict, and will be resolved either by compromise, or erasure.

Much fiction has concluded that in such a future, reality will be defined by those with the strongest will, or conviction, to see their imagined reality true. But conviction has no relation to reality. We all know those, who on a small scale or a large scale, firmly believe things that conflict directly with true reality.

But really, we don't need to imagine such a future - to a certain degree, we're already living in it. The advent of technology that has allowed the endless spread of information has also allowed for the endless spread of disinformation, and there are no end of people with absolute conviction in utter untruth. And the power of our technology not only lets them discard complexities in favour of simplicities, it allows them to refine, and return their flawed ontology back to the world.

This is no Luddite screed against the spread of knowledge or technology. It is an inevitability of a social society to come together, and an inevitability for a technologically-capable society to reach out. As a great and infrequent speaker once said, 'The very nature of these inventions cries out for the goodness in men - cries out for universal brotherhood - for the unity of us all.'

But just as goodness can make your enemy into your friend, cruel cunning and complacency can make your enemies and friends alike into zealots.

All of the finest education we can muster has not stopped the intelligent from collapsing back into foolishness; doctors who disbelieve in proven medicine, journalists who prefer complacency over duty, politicians who play games of brinksmanship with people's lives. In fact, the intelligent are often the easiest to fool, especially by ontological manipulation: they would rather reality be reshaped around them than admit that they were ever wrong.

*

They who wield ontological weapons, do so thus -

1. you have beliefs in society and unity. They take advantage of them, twisting them to crueler ends, finding their ways into gaps in your thinking. The gaps are opened by our wonderment about the world, used against us. They're opened by whispered misinformation and also by time; our memories are not long enough to protect us.

2. you have societal structures that exist to support the growing complexity of your society. They undermine them, devalue them, disregard them, and in some cases, simply quietly abandon them to disrepair and inevitable collapse.

3. you have bulwarks against manipulation and misinformation. They disrupt them, whether by starving them of information, or flooding them with information. If someone cruel seeks to define reality as cruel in itself, rather than remove anyone who would disagree, they can simply claim it as such.

*

So, the ontological weapon is this -

1. I state the shape of reality, and I demonstrate it.

2. If no one can prove otherwise, I have defined reality and can act upon it further to my own ends.

3. If others challenge my reality, then theirs should win out over mine, but it does not, and therefore mine must be true.

This is the logic of the cruel, the 'sword logic', the 'survival of the fittest' so  commonly wielded by dictators, liars, abusers, regressives. That this logic is demonstrably false and mathematically unjust does not matter, because inside the logic itself is a circular loop: "If my reality was not true, then it would fail, because it would lack the validity to be upheld. I take control and abuse and do harm and I do not fail; no just actor stops me, so I define reality thus." 

*

The lie of this weapon is this -

1. The shape of reality that I state can be false. That others believe it does not make it true. It only makes it *real*.

2. My demonstration of my reality can be false. I can manipulate the actors in this demonstration at every level, or simply muddy the waters until no one can be sure.

3. My dismissal of others' realities can be fallacious. I can dismiss all criticism, simply ignore it, or dogmatize it and turn the complacent against it. The cruel endlessly use projection to avoid criticism, always accusing their opponents of doing the same harms they do, because they can not imagine why anyone would be better.

The conviction that I might hold that leads me to create this false, cruel, reality is absolutely true. And that conviction can drive me to any lengths, no matter how desperate and destructive, to maintain that reality. With those convictions, I speak with resolute (but false) authority, act with absolute (but unjustified) impunity, utterly certain of my false beliefs until either I die or am finally willing to admit I might be wrong. And one thing humans can never be relied upon to do is admit that they might be wrong.

*

The deliberate reduction of reality to simplicity;
the manipulation of the free press to be mouthpieces;
the weaponization of people's good faith desire to wait and see;
the simplification of complex societies to 'us' and 'other';
the absolute exhaustion we all feel at how much must be done to undo these harms;
these are all scars that this weapon leaves behind.

What you must understand about the ontological weapon is that there is often no grand conspiracy wielding it. Far from it, as such a conspiracy would require the cruel acting together, a thing they are often reticent to do, even along ideological lines. Those wielding the weapon hold no allegiance to each other, and they will not hesitate to abandon or harm each other in the same way they harm everyone with their actions.

It is in itself a form of cruel complacency; a desire to maintain a destructive status quo with no thought for the consequences. Do not ascribe to the wielders grand designs aside from greed and hate and personal interest, for that way lies madness and imagining complexity where it does not exist. Instead consider how much easier it might be to slowly warp the world to your designs, rather than try to control it directly.

There are no dark gods wielding this weapon; instead it is lifted and moved, inch by inch, by those who already have power. All the weapon requires is enough bad actors acting independently that they begin to align in shaping a darker reality that suits them all, in such a way that they can remain removed from the individual agents they use to manipulate and harm at every other level of this reality. 

Many of those agents act resolutely but unwittingly because this is what they think reality must be, and while they are also victims of this manipulations, their harmful actions still have consequences and they are not innocent. You are not innocent, but also you are a victim, and what exactly that means, you are going to have to determine.

*

The defense against the ontological weapon is thus -

Breaking it.

It is a fragile thing, that mostly takes advantage of its pervasiveness and invisibility to do harm. It does not hold up to scrutiny in any form, unless it has so infected the reality around it that no true scrutiny can be offered. It is wielded by the cruel, who are clever but vulnerable, desperate to maintain their hold on any power to such a degree that they can just as easily be deceived. 

Their conviction in their own cruel realities means they cannot imagine a better reality, and cannot fathom that their reality may have flaws. Even if they are wiser and aware of the flaws, they are still, in a way, bound by the rules of the reality that they have created, and ultimately, they are still just humans, vulnerable to the same degree as any other, and in largely the same ways.

You may yet be able to escape the swing of this weapon, and the best way to build a safeguard against it is to refuse to see the world as too simple or too complex to be considered. You must imagine better realities, and act in service of them, with the goal of making them real. Use your conviction in those better realities to drive you towards them, and use your knowledge and critical thinking to guide you along the way. 

Those better realities you dare to dream of will more align with the true reality, the one you see the edges of every day. Technologies can be used for good just as much as they can be used for harm. We have the means to make the world less cruel, and provide space and time for everyone, and allow each of them to reach their potential for progress and joy and art and creation.

Just know this; in pushing back, you are not winning a clash of weapons. Your better reality is not winning against theirs, you are refusing to participate in something that is not truly a battle and fundamentally never was. In a way, you may be proving their reality unfit to exist, but rather than reinserting your own reality to take the place of theirs, you are instead aiming to create a better one for everyone, escaping the binary logic that states that you are alone.

You are not alone.